Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Today we're beginning a three part series on science fiction author Lee Killow.
Killow is a Kansas native who wrote several short stories during the 1970s, then produced
four novels in short order in the 1980s.
She began as a writer of hard science fiction, but here we find out how she converted to
the more character oriented variety.
I started out and my interest was mostly in really hard science fiction.
I was a die hard analog reader.
And the first story I ever sold was to analog and it was an analog kind of story.
I haven't sold a story to analog since.
Almost everything I've written since has come out in, the majority of it has come out
in the fantasy science fiction.
I've had one in Galileo and a couple in GIF Magazine before it folded.
But I got more and more interested in people and realizing that hardware wasn't the thing,
that it was people and that people were interesting and what made them tick.
And so the more I started researching that, the more I got interested in what makes society
to click.
And then when I started making up aliens and I started reading a lot of anthropology to
figure out, you know, really how societies go together, the more I read, the more I researched,
the more fascinated I got.
Kilo goes to great lengths to keep the details of her books consistent.
Listeners she explains how she is able to keep track of the minutiae.
I put together a background book before I ever start the novel itself.
It's an amount of work that I know some people find exhausting.
They couldn't do it and still have any energy left to write the book.
But I enjoy it.
I'm very systematic.
I start out with a lot of visual images in my head.
And with vague visual images, you have to have them developed to a very clear image
and you have to find the words for them and get them translated into actual words out
of pictures before you can get them down on paper.
So I do a background book and I do maps of the planet.
I do drawings of the flora and fauna and biogas and these are the people.
And the more I read and read on climatology and planetology, the more complex backgrounds
get.
It takes me about the same amount of time to put a background together but it gets much
more complicated.
Now they're almost finished.
Background is almost as thick as the final manuscript on the book.
Writers have many reasons for applying their trade.
Kelo has an interesting point of view on the role and rewards of writers including herself.
A writer entertains.
And if he thinks that he's creating desolate prose with every line he struggles to put down
and if he's writing for history, then he's probably got pretensions of grandeur.
If I write a book that people buy and read by buying, they give me my money which I need.
And if they enjoy it by reading it, then I'm really happy.
I don't think I would write a book just for money but certainly I want to write something
that is fun for me to write and I want to write something that is fun for readers to read.
Kelo's work sell demand with all's well and they lived happily ever after.
She believes that life is fraught with problems.
There are a lot of large social problems that exist within each book that never get solved.
But people in the book solve their own problems.
They handle their own lives.
And I think maybe that a little bit of personal philosophy of mine comes through that.
I can't solve the world's problems but I can certainly keep control of my own life.
And my belief in that I can pass on.
Join us tomorrow as we look at a few of Lee Kelo's novels.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Today we will continue our discussion of Science Fiction author Lee Kelo.
Perhaps her best-received novel today is the Doppelganger Gambit, a futuristic police procedure mystery novel.
A good deal of the book's appeal lies in its skillful depiction of the interaction between police officers.
We asked Kelo if she got this from first-hand experience.
I haven't had any practical experience in it.
I did have a police officer come up to me at the Science Fiction Convention once when I'd been reading a chapter of Doppelganger.
And he asked me when I worked in law enforcement.
Once I decided I wanted to write a mystery science fiction, I went ahead and did more research.
And I've kept into it, and of course that book itself and others have brought me into contact with more police officers.
And they've passed on a lot of material to me.
And so, sort of actually working in it myself, like I have gotten very familiar with it.
And I suppose I keep reading about it, writing about it, because it was interesting and because I've all done so much research on it.
But it's a shame not to use the material.
Kelo's slang term for a police person in the Doppelganger gambit is Leo.
We asked her to explain the origin of this expression.
I think I was seeing something about law enforcement officers one time, and I noticed that it made Leo.
And I thought, that's great, because it gave rise in my mind to all kinds of connotations.
And I could see police officers enjoying being called Leo because of the lion, the fierce kind of association you get with it.
And therefore calling police stations lion, then, and someone who's likely to be picked up by the police is lion meat.
The memorable lead characters in the Doppelganger gambit, both Leo's, are partnered throughout the book.
They manage to transcend all sexual and philosophical barriers ultimately to solve the case.
Listen as Kelo explains how she came up with the characters of Jana Brill and Mama Maxwell.
For contrast, I gave her a male partner, and I can't remember why I decided to make him black.
One of these things that just kind of happened, somebody later pointed out that I had my female character was the one that was working by the book and procedure,
and my male character was the one who was working on intuition, which is an interesting reverse on the way people generally think of males and females.
And that just sort of happened. The characters sort of balanced one another, but a lot of the balance was unconscious on my part.
Jana Brill and Mama Maxwell are a fascinating pair. We asked Kelo if she plans to use them again.
They were fun characters, and I intend to work with them again.
Kelo wrote another police procedure novel, set in the same future history. This book is called Deadly Silence with a T.
In this novel, Taryn Leos are transported to the planet Egar to function as peace officers.
There they must operate under different rules. Their first duty is to aid the victims of crimes, rather than to pursue the perpetrator.
How did Kelo come up with this role?
I suppose it reflects a little bit of a reaction to some of the things that I've seen in our own culture, where the victim suffers a lot because everybody's so interested in catching the guy who did it.
A lot of times they're not paying too much attention to the victim himself.
In another twist, the Leos must function as defense attorneys when the perpetrator is brought to trial.
Tomorrow, more on Arthur Lee Kelo.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
The show today will deal further with the work of Science Fiction author Lee Kelo.
Another novel by Kelo goes by the unlikely title, the Monitor, the Miners, and the Shree.
It differs from the works we discussed previously in that it is said in another future history, one called the Sodality.
Listen as Kelo talks about the origins and the inhabitants of this universe.
It's very peaceful and wonderful and tended to get much more complex and much more violent.
The older I got, the more I realized that people just didn't get along with each other all the time.
I had several short stories that are set in that particular universe, and I'll probably come back to it again.
It's an interesting one because it has a lot of different groups, none of which are human, and offers possibilities for societies and interplays.
An alien, in the future history I have set up the one that most of the novels are in, has a minimal of aliens,
so far we've actually gone on to run across one, which is spacing.
And then of course there's aliens that are on the planet on which the colonists who are in trouble on the invictus land of the book I'm working on
and that's not the moment that has some aliens on it.
But there's a minimal of aliens, and if I want to deal with alien species it's just really easy to go to that other future history,
which has all kinds of aliens running around.
I like to think that it's just being across, being on our same galaxy, it's just on the other side,
way out of contact with us, probably not where we're likely to run into it very soon.
The plot of the Monitor of the Miners in the Shrie is centered about the fact that representatives of the Department of Surveys and Charters
are sent to monitor the world naira, a proscripted world, for any signs of progress among the primitive inhabitants, the Shrie.
The team discovers that a corporation by the name of Imra has been actively mining the planet for 500 years, an action strictly forbidden by the sodality.
The last chapter of the novel is a courtroom scene.
We asked Killow for husband Pat, who happens to be a lawyer, offered her any advice on its content.
In fact, the lawyer half wrote that particular chapter, he was telling me, oh, this character ought to say that,
and then you ought to bring up this point, and then you ought to counter with that legal point.
And the whole chapter definitely got submitted to him for scrutiny as a procedure in logical thinking.
So he's happy at, he's half the creator of that last chapter.
Recently, a book of Killow's short stories appeared under the name Aventine.
This is a collection of loosely connected stories, all set in the city of Aventine, a cultural and fine arts center.
The stories are told from a first person point of view. We asked Killow why she chose this approach.
I like those particular stories from a first person point of view because you can understand then,
the storyteller is always victimized in some way in those particular stories.
And you see inside of him, and you don't see things outside, you just see things entirely from his point of view,
and why you may think he's dumb and getting trapped like that.
Why, you can see why he ends up being victimized.
Besides writing, singing, drawing, dancing, and theater are artistic influences in Killow's background.
It was this experience that helped inspire her to write the Aventine stories.
We asked her how the ideas developed.
Most of those stories came out of images. There'd be like one single image.
I liked the image of a pair of footprints scarlet in sand going away.
The image just kept with me and kept with me until I found a story to go with it.
Lee Killow is a dedicated, conscientious writer from whom we can expect more fine work.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Our show today is about science fiction author Rudy Rucker.
Rucker was trained as a mathematician.
He burst under the science fiction scene in 1981 with one of the most original novels to appear in years, White Light.
But White Light was not the first novel Rucker authored.
I wrote this. I wrote it during summer, not teaching in New York.
And there what I wanted to do with that book was make a strong anarchist statement about the way I felt in that society.
It was, you know, like basically sort of late 60s, really, even though it was really big 70s.
Rucker was unable to sell space-time donuts immediately.
Here he tells us a story behind his very successful White Light.
The way I came to write White Light was kind of weird.
I wrote space-time donuts and I couldn't sell them anywhere.
And finally, on Earth Magazine agreed to serialize it.
And they serialized the first two parts of it and they went out of business.
And at that point I lost my job when I was teaching in New York.
They would give me 10 years of time.
But then I got a grant to go to do mathematics in Germany.
And I got a grant from the German government.
Went to Heidelberg. Went there for, I had a two-year, well, a two-year grant there.
And it's from the Fund Homeboat Foundation.
That's why some of my books are dedicated to Homeboat.
And I got over there and to my delight I discovered that the person in charge of my research
really didn't care about mathematics either.
So I just started writing science fiction.
And I spent about three months trying to solve this problem, continuum problem.
Like that, you know, I knew a lot about it. It's a very difficult problem.
And then I said, well, I'm just going to write a novel about it.
And then I came to write White Light that way.
Which, it's about different levels of affinity.
The packaging of an American edition of White Light made it appear as though the book
were another in a long line of life after life books.
We asked Rucker how this came about.
Well, that was Jim Bain. He was the editor of Ace at that time.
And he bought it. I was happy that he bought it.
You know, he gave me good money.
It was his marketing decision.
He probably thought, well, we can film more copies if we package it as something for
superstitious foolish people instead of packaging it as avant-garde literature.
I imagine he's probably right.
We asked Rucker if he had any input on the packaging.
Well, the one thing I got him to put on the cover was, do you want to see God?
I got him to put that on the back.
We asked Rucker how people who bought the book thinking it was a straight life after life
novel reacted to it.
Well, I've met people since then that are really into like dream stuff and after travel.
Like, they've read it and very seriously and they're just like, don't understand why
the book is sort of not so serious as it should be.
More on Rudy Rucker on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Today's show continues a discussion on science fiction author Rudy Rucker.
When we asked Rucker if the name White Light was inspired by the so-called White Light,
those who have near-death experiences reportedly see, the answer was a definite no.
Here he explains the actual origin of the title.
White Light, that's like in the 60s when if you took like a whole lot of LSD,
everything would get all white, you know, and then God would talk to you.
And that was like an inexperience that usually you would only get it once because
the media would look out for it the other time.
That's where White Light is.
Rucker's third novel, Software, is written in a more conventional style
than were White Light and Spacetime Donuts.
It differs from these two in another aspect as well.
The young guy who's sort of, you know, based on a guy that I used to hang around with,
a guy younger than me, and the old guy in there is, can extend based on their father.
In Software, a simulacrum of the famous mathematician Girdle,
makes a brief appearance to lecture on Girdle's incompleteness theorem.
This theorem says that humans cannot build robots as intelligent as themselves.
Rucker had several discussions with Girdle shortly before Girdle died.
Listen as he describes the relationship.
I'll think about Girdle when you talk to him.
When I talk to him, I go and make up a list of questions.
I want to ask him about all this stuff, about math and philosophy and physics and so on.
And I keep it sitting alone in Princeton there, like for 30 years.
Like 30 years ago, he approved the heaviest things that anybody had ever done in mathematics.
He'd been like 30 years past that. He was thinking all the time.
And anything I'd ask him, you know, like he'd already been all the way down the road.
And he would just laugh. I mean, a lot of when I talk to him, he'd say a few words and then he'd start laughing.
And I'd start laughing with him.
And like as we would laugh, I would feel like we were communicating.
It was awesome. I mean, it sounds kind of stupid when I say it like this, but awesome.
It was, you know, like a real feeling of telepathy almost.
Like, you know, just anything I'd say you'd totally understand.
Which is really unquestionably the greatest person I've ever made.
The German philosopher Hegel is Rucker several times removed Grandfather.
We asked him if there is any of Hegel's influence in his work.
I think I've done my part, you know, for the absolute.
I really, I'd like to read his stuff and it's pretty hard to read.
I've read books about him, but the actual books are very hard to read.
But it's my impression that I have somewhat the same ideas about the absolute, the absolute being the ultimate thing, the white life.
And I would say, you know, like later people look back and say, well, it's pretty much what Hegel would have wanted to write if he was a scientist.
Rudy Rucker, the science fiction author who plans to continue doing his part for the absolute.
I'm not sure what I'm saying.